Okay, tape is running again.
Okay, I've counted the books that I think you've got published so far and I've come
up with about 12 or 13, is that right?
I would imagine that's about right.
Okay, I think I've read everything that you had out at the present time.
My personal favorite is the Fated Sun trilogy.
You've only made one comment on that which sort of answered one of my questions,
which is it pronounced the Marie?
Marie, yes.
Marie, if you'd modeled them in any cultures, you've already answered that one.
I guess what I'll ask you is what do you, as their creator or Duncan, the human who lives with them,
what do you admire about them?
I think that for one thing, I, about Marie, I think I admire their steadfastness,
their ability to face time itself with tranquility in the sense that they can take the long view,
which is a thing that is absolutely necessary in my mind for civilized survival.
Mind, I don't say just survival, but civilized survival.
Is there ability to look down the centuries and see consequences?
The Marie sense of time is a very strange thing.
A Marie always lives now, and that now is a composite of the past,
current events, and the future, simultaneously.
They do not view time as the modern American does, which is more or less a set of beads on the string
that we can snip off any tail of the string that seems inconvenient to us.
The Marie concept of the universe is holistic, and their ability to perceive that all of time impacts on every moment that they live,
I think is one of the things that I most enjoy about that, about that species.
What about Duncan? Why does he choose to give up his, in a sense, give up his humanity and become one of them?
Well, the character of Duncan himself, he will recall that he has no past.
He was born in the war, probably an orphan, very early in life, transferred to a state nursery,
and brought up to fight, essentially to pay for his existence by becoming a soldier in a war that had gone on much longer than made sense for anyone.
When he encountered the Marie, he is a very symptom man in many ways.
He's highly educated in his narrow field of specialization. The state saw to that.
But when he encounters the Marie, he cannot sympathize with the diplomats, with anything else that's going on.
But what he considered to be another soldier from his viewpoint, with a soldier's morality, he could comprehend and respect that.
That respect then led him to a deeper understanding of the people.
To me, one of the more pathetic things in the story is Duncan himself, who is attacking the Regal Library, attempting a completely uneducated man in many ways,
attempting to understand the culture that he has just contributed to destroying.
And he becomes obsessed with it.
He finally conceives it as a moral responsibility of his own, and thereby falls into a trap,
because his humanity, his sense of moral responsibility, his feeling of blame for what has happened, leads him to attempt to save these people.
And once he has done that, he discovers that if he remains what he is, namely human,
that will as effectively destroy them as any bomb any attack could do.
So, his final sacrifice in a sort of a redemptive sense is that he finally agrees that he will no longer attempt to be human.
That he begins to try to be something else.
Even in that, there is a considerable hazard, because if the transition is not complete, he may end up contaminating the culture,
which to the Marie and their way of life is a very, very serious thing.
But it is a voluntary and conscious decision that is effectively at his personal suicide.
And he takes it because he feels responsible for what has happened.
Okay, I think it was in the second book of the series, there was a particular episode that, I guess of all your writing, this I think got to me the most,
is the game called Shonhai Shonai.
When I was making the jumps back to the Marie home world, and I guess it's Naoyunas or Niunas teaching him the Shonai game.
I was fascinated enough about that to wonder if there was any model behind that particular game and its purpose or its intention.
I suppose that if I thought very far back into my childhood, I could think of games that I played that were similar.
Rhythm games, games of coordination.
The game to the Marie is a form of literature.
It contains the relationships of the people.
And as such, I suppose the great deal of it was made up completely out of whole cloth.
Because from simply the initial thought of a rhythm game, the original concept as I had it was simply a rhythm or a chant.
And beyond that, the concept grew as my understanding of the Marie increased just by working with that sort of culture.
Until I began to realize that if you're playing this thing as dangerously as they play it,
that it's going to make a great deal of difference in terms of the weaknesses and strengths of the players.
It's going to have a great deal to say about the interdependencies and independences, if you will, of the individuals within the community.
Who can play with whom, who sets opposite whom, who is allied to whom.
And it also has to do with the philosophy of the people, which again has to do with the great now.
The ability to turn loose of a thing and to live for the moment which stretches in all directions in time.
To, as Neon puts it, open the hand and let go, which is one of the hardest things that Duncan has to learn.
Okay, one more question on those books.
It seemed to me that you did leave an opening at the end of the third volume, and I wanted to ask if you perhaps could have any plans to continue with Marie.
Yes, there is a possibility of that.
I had to work so intensely with that culture for quite a while that I do not at present trust myself to tamper with it.
I think that like the Morgane book, there is a possibility of my going back and working with it again.
As a matter of fact, I already have sort of the germ of an idea, but it will have to gather months for quite a while.
I want to make sure that if I disturb them again, it's for a worthy cause.
And not just to write a book to be a sequel, but to be sure that it is a kind of story that could only be told with Marie.
That's one of the penalties of working with cultures.
You lose the ability to say, well, I would like to write a story, and I think I will write a story with these people.
When the story that I told is wound as deeply into the culture and history of a species as the fated sun was,
you have to come up with another kind of story which could only be told about that culture.
Okay, let me run to one more work.
What was the impetus behind the short stories in the book Sunfall?
It's so different than the other things you've done. I wondered what was behind that?
Well, it's different perhaps than other things which have come to light.
But I think that I've traveled a great deal about the world.
I've been in, well, let me think, I've been to Rome and to London.
I've never been in Paris actually, but I've been all over France.
And Istanbul, which didn't make it in, I was going to do an Istanbul story.
And yet, I've never been to Peking either.
But basically, I began thinking about the organism of a city as an entity.
The concept of a city having a personality different than all other things.
You go to New York and you could not mistake it for Rome.
It's just the composite of people living there gives it a different flavor,
a different case, a different style than any other place.
Also, to a certain extent, I suppose it's psychologically related to the fated sun.
Because when I was thinking about another species at the end of time, I wondered,
what about the Earth when we're very, very old?
What sort of things might we preserve as our artifacts?
And the idea occurred to me that one of the things that humanity has created,
which for all we know may be unique to humanity, is this concept we call city.
And consequently, the story arose with the cities differentiating from each other
to such an extent that we return to the age of the city-state.
Civilization is slowly being canceled just because of the interval of distance and time
and the difference of culture over the years.
Who was the idea of the city, the idea behind that book would have been conceived
before you wrote the short stories or did you write the short stories individually
and then sort of think of a way to put them together?
Well, actually, the initial story in the whole piece was the Rome story.
George Sithers then with Isaac Asimov's magazines had shown me a cover
which contained a fantastical number of elements.
And sort of on a bad ask if I could write a short story based on that.
Because back in the old days, you know, writers did used to write stories to fit the covers rather than the other way around.
So I undertook it and George's comment on the story was about that
but most editors make on my short stories which was this seems to be connected to something else,
probably the affliction of novelists, you see.
But I wrote that one in a lay about a while and then, you know, at the World Convention,
they're always asking you to do readings in your work and I didn't have one.
So I sat down and wrote The Only Death in the City
as sort of inspired by the Rome story and that one's set in Paris
so that I had something to read at the World Convention which I did.
Then it suddenly struck me that I had two stories which were obviously connected to something else
and finally it dawned on me that I could do several more of them since they were of an untidy length
and I actually have a book.
So out of all that broth of thinking about the world over the age and the character of cities
and the fact that I had two of them in hand, why I sat down and wrote several of them right in the string, one after the other.
Okay, I got the impression with some of those stories, for instance, the Paris one in the Moscow one,
that you may have consciously been modeling them on a folk tale method.
They seem very much like a folk tale or a fairy tale to me almost.
It wouldn't be surprising because I've done a great deal of work in this.
I also personally tend to believe that folk tales are a fairly accurate form of preserving the group consciousness of the people,
the retellings of them through the centuries.
Everybody adds their own veneer, their own layer of experience so that some of our very old stories
acquire more and more significances the older they get.
Cinderella being a good case in point which has been changed in practically every century.
It's been retold to fit the current myth of.
In the Paris one, I think that I was not consciously drawing on any single fairy tale that I can think of,
but in the Russian one, definitely, I don't know, frankly, I don't know very much about Moscow.
I literally had to look up a city plan to find out what it was like.
I had to look up about old Moscow and to see how far it stretched and probably what the first settlement was,
where the first building stood and why and all of this sort of thing.
Once I determined that and I began thinking back on all the quintessential Russian stories that I'd ever heard,
most of which seemed to involve roles in one form or another.
I thought of the character of the land and I have studied Russian.
I have taken the Russian language so that I know something about the literature and I know something about the interrelations of the words,
what concepts are related to other words and what words are psychologically important within the language.
So I just stirred all that together and came out with the Moscow story.
Okay, one more observation or question on that book.
You didn't have in mind any echo of the dying earth, did you?
Were the earths living its last days in the various cultures on it or at their end?
Well, I won't say that I was unconscious of it.
The dying earth is something I read so long ago that I think that I'm almost ready to reread it as I do things which I enjoy a great deal.
Having forgotten some of the salient details of it so deeply that I think that now again I can enjoy it.
As I did the first time, I do recall that I liked it a great deal, but I cannot for the life of me remember exactly what went on in it.
Which is the kind of reader I am. When I really am loving a book, I begin to attempt to blur it in my mind and forget it as rapidly as possible so that I can have the pleasure of rereading it within a year or so.
I think that some of the influences on my writing in later periods than the first ones that I named have been Jack Vance and Fritz Leiber and so on.
I don't think that one can remain unaffected by those ideas.
Both of those writers have written on topics that I'm very fond of which is the urban community and fantasy.
There often you know fantasy pits one lone barbarian wandering off across an icy landscape coping with what comes.
But the urban community in fantasy is the province of those two writers in particular that I think of at the moment and definitely they have had their influence.
Whether subconscious or direct, I did receive a very kind letter from Fritz Leiber who was kind enough to say that he had read Sunfall and we shared some feelings for cities.
I think that has impressed me a great deal over the work that has been out that I've read of yours is the flexibility of your style.
I read it if you consciously work at a particular style for a particular book.
Do you change it? Do you alter anything in terms of the story and the kind of book you're writing?
I suppose that has to do with being a bit of a linguist.
There's also the fact that I have to break myself or writing an actillic examiner or Virgil students will know what I mean.
And in some books I do allow myself to slip into a little bit more poetic style.
It also seems to me that one style should be appropriate to the story that one is telling.
So that if you're telling a story about nomads whose very means of expression is going to be perhaps figurative and poetical,
then you can do this sort of thing in the faded sun for instance.
These styles vary radically from chapter to chapter according to whether I happen to be dealing with the nomadic culture of the Marie
or whether I'm dealing with the humans who tend to their narration background tends to be much more stark and efficient.
I've worked in Dear Fantasy stories where I've looked at the language myself and looked back on it and thought,
oh my goodness, I think I've been writing in rhythm again.
A habit of which I try to cure myself because I do try to write prose.
In Down Below Station the style varies again.
That is I think fairly bold, modern style.
And I guess that I just view it as a part of the composition.
For instance, if I were doing a portrait as an artist, as a Renaissance person,
I think I would automatically tend to fall into Renaissance style in my drawing and my painting,
rather than trying to be a Cubist or a Pointillist or whatever.
It's the same way with my handling of words.
If I'm talking on a subject that is itself old and my style is different than one in which I'm talking about computers,
unless I'm making a point.
If I were for instance talking about a computer as a vehicle of prophecy,
I might deliberately fall back into an older mode of expression relating it back to Delacy or something.
Well, I find that's one of the hardest things in the world in writing sequels,
is because my mode of expression changes also with time.
It's very, very difficult for me to go back and to recapture the language of a particular book.
I have to reread it myself several times to fall back into that mode of expression.
Yeah, I would imagine I would be true.
That sort of brings up another question I was going to ask you.
When you start to write a book, do you entirely plot the thing out and have it fixed
and then simply put it on paper or do you just get in the mood and just let it come out whatever comes?
There's only one book that I've written straight through.
From beginning to end, well maybe two.
I did a number of false starts. I have about ten to fifteen different beginnings for Gator Bebrell.
After it gets beyond chapter five, then everything proceeds like a straight line to the end.
Many of the later chapters are written first draft, which is very unusual for me.
Eight drafts is not unusual in a book.
The paper I generate is really phenomenal.
I have filled a, I could literally fill a bushel basket without taking some motion novels.
But the one that I did write virtually from start to finish without a glitch was Wave Without a Shore.
That one I just started at chapter one.
Pardon me, from chapter one to the very end.
It was virtually all first draft and although I think I went through three.
That was it. Most of the others I find that I don't even start at the beginning of the book.
What is now chapter eight in The Fated Sun started out as chapter one and so on.
Like my literary idol Virgil, I tend to write in both directions at once.
I sort of begin at a point in action which makes sense to me and then I discover that I have to build back of that
to explain how everybody got into the situation that I visualized at the beginning.
Okay, I think I know the answer to this or I could suspect it but I'm going to ask it anyhow.
When you set up an alien culture, the terms, the language that you make up for,
for instance in The Hunter of Worlds I think you did it more extensively there than most other places.
Are you using any kind of language structure or any kind of languages as a background for that
or is it just your own knowledge of linguistics that allows you to make that up?
I consciously, I try to make it easy on the reader.
Some readers I suppose may deny this but I truly do.
I will for instance try to keep related words at least resembling one another closely enough that a person can figure out
well this is something to do with say love or fight having seen a similar configuration before
and if they miss it a little bit in terms of saying romance versus combat or something like that
in the park.
I do try to be kind also in not having words which aren't related starting with the same letter
so I do some things which are designed for kindness to the reader.
Likewise when I'm dealing with alien names I try to avoid having two or three aliens with very similar names
which can be very very confusing because there are many people who do not read phonetically
and this could be a problem to them so I'll try to have them start at different points of the alphabet.
Hunter of Worlds is constructed for different reasons usually when I use alien languages in a book.
It is not for local color it's just that when you run across anybody's civilization which is vastly different than your own
you're going to come across three or four words which cannot be translated no matter how you would like to.
It's just that not all languages have words for concepts.
Well you know like in English you can take several things that you can say that you can't say in French and vice versa
which is why language borrow words from other languages.
When I did Hunter of Worlds I was doing something totally different and it is an experimental novel
and it is not a novel but I recommend it to someone who is not used to science fiction
or not used to language one or the other.
Basically on that one the very premise of the book is linguistics.
Treating the science of linguistics as you will as seriously as you treat physics in a science fiction novel.
I deliberately set out to make a language which is not based on any earthly model.
I even changed the rules of grammar to something that as far as I know is not directly based on any grammatical system on the face of the earth.
The thing is explained in an appendix in the back for people who wish to do this kind of thing.
And there are several ways to read the book.
The recommended one is as the viewpoint character sees it.
Frankly the viewpoint character is confused as all get out most of the time.
He doesn't understand so you can equally well appreciate the book simply by realizing that from his viewpoint
a lot of these people are speaking things that he in no rise comprehends.
The trouble with the book is that of course at several points he is vastly mistaken about what he thinks he understands.
So the book does have some pitfalls in it for somebody who is accustomed to believing everything that the hero in a novel believes must ergo be the truth.
Because he is very very frequently mistaken or very very frequently picks up a concept which is not the whole concept
and gradually begins to arrive at an understanding of what's going on toward the end of the book.
But I must warn everyone that even at the end he is somewhat mistaken.
Yeah that book did take a little more thought I think in work than some of the others did.
Let me change direction one more time.
I don't know if you think about the I'm sure you think about these things but do you have a definition of science fiction?
I think the best one that ever came up was Roger's The Last Me's definition.
At least I believe it's his. I don't know from whom he may have gotten it.
It's basically that if I ever discover a definition of science fiction I shall immediately attempt to violate it.
Science fiction to me is a will always remain an experimental literature.
It does not have rules except to try to adhere to science and to prove things as much as possible and to try to have your research well founded
in at least the best possible understanding of what's going on that you can arrive at.
To me science fiction is the same thing that the unknown writer of the Kilgamesh epic did.
A voyage in search of the unknown this sort of literature.
It's the oldest kind of literature in the world.
Frankly I have you modern mainstream fiction as an aberration largely brought on by culture shock with the advent of the machine age.
I think that it was sort of a reaction by a literary establishment that was not technologically educated
and was in many instances not equipped to understand what was going on in the world.
So they retreated into a rather unrealistic form of literature which really attempted to either ignore the transformation
which was taking place in human society or having seen it or trying to deal with it could see no answer for it.
So my view of science fiction is that it is the cultural mainstream of western literature and eastern literature as well in many forms.
And that it's no different in spirit or in type than the old epics.
Epics are essentially literature of migration and mankind is presently contemplating a rather large one.
Could you tell me what you think draws people to science fiction? Why it's so popular?
I think the same thing that is always drawn people to all of the aforementioned.
It's curiosity. It's a wish to be in touch with one's environment, one's real environment.
There are so many people who go through their daily lives concerned only with what happens in the office and what happens around them.
And it's sort of like being locked in one cell if you never see beyond that nature and the universe have so much more to it than what you perceive if you limit your vision to your immediate time and your immediate place and your immediate circumstance.
There's a certain nobility in ordinary daily affairs. I do not deny that.
But I think that the real understanding of what actually goes on in those ordinary daily affairs only comes through a wider understanding of the universe as a whole.
And this is what I think draws people to science fiction, to fantasy, to this whole vast realm of a romantical or positive way of looking at the universe which has been in the mainstream of thought since literature began.
Okay, maybe you've answered this already. Maybe I'm just restating the question, but let me ask it anyhow. Do you think science fiction has a particular value for its readers?
I could not hear the last part of that question.
Would you say that science fiction had a particular value or is it a valuable thing for its readers?
Yes, I would say that the value of science fiction is essentially the broadening of vision in time because we do not really concern ourselves only with the future.
This is why fantasy, which deals with past ages, has been quite as comfortable in associating science fiction as it has.
On the one hand, it should seem very strange to find fantasy readers and science fiction readers trading books.
We think that we had nothing to say to each other, but in point of fact we have all the world to say to each other. We have all of human experience to say to each other.
We have the long view, one sort of being the memory of mankind and the other being the hope and the aspiration of where we will go and what we will do.
Two sides of the same coin are as they agree with part of the Great Now.
It is a kind of literature that widens the experience beyond one's daily life.
It shows us the true size of the Earth, the true size of the Universe, the true importance of our troubles.
Both the size and complexity of them and sometimes the extreme simplicity of them, it gives us perspective in dealing with the world around us and with each other.
It shows us that we have in many instances a good deal more in common than we do in difference.
Okay, that's excellent. Thank you very much.
I don't have very much more to ask you, just a couple more.
Yeah, David.
Are you drying out on us? Are you okay on that end?
Yeah. Okay.
I guess really sort of well, okay. It's sort of a two-prong question maybe.
I wondered which of your books are the most popular in terms of sales, you know, your best sellers, and also maybe in terms of fan response.
It's very difficult to judge this because I'm fairly young as a writer goes.
My works have only been out now for what, six years, something like that.
And sales figures are still coming in.
So the only thing I can tell you is that the oldest books have sold the most.
And there does seem, if you compare sales figures to be some acceleration in it, also there must be a remarkable number of people that having read one or are going for the others.
I hope that this is the case because the sales figures seem to be remarkably similar in terms of...
Well, there's been some books that I've noticed that have caught on a little more slowly, like Hunter.
I think that perhaps it took a little bit of readers getting used to me before they were ready to deal with Underworld.
But in general, I would say that these sales have been fairly well even.
Or if they were not even, they tend to become more and more even.
Which I think has also helped with the fact that all my books are in current issue.
And if one likes one, one can find the others.
So about the other, it's kind of curious, again, time plays a part in that.
The more game books, the Gate Trilogy does attract a great deal of male response in AIL.
In the sense that possibly because it is a finished story and there was a great deal of it,
and possibly people spent a great deal of time with it, also the fact that I think fantasy people are great letter writers.
I do get quite a lot of mail on that.
It also seems to provoke Spanish art.
I've seen a great number of very beautiful renditions of the characters from that book, which again may say something about what people's favorite may be.
But then it's got a lot of things that are really nice to draw like horses and medieval armor and this sort of thing.
I also get a great deal of mail about the fated sun trilogy and a great deal of interest in that one.
So the two longer ones.